[Music]
what's up everybody welcome to
omnipotent health and fitness episode
number eight our guest today is a
professor of biology at boston college
and received his phd in genetics and
biochemistry from the university of
illinois
he served with distinction in the united
states army's first calvary division in
the vietnam war prior to completing a
postdoctoral fellowship in the
department of neurology at yale
university school of medicine he
subsequently served on the faculty as an
assistant professor in neurology before
continuing his research into the
ketogenic diet and cancer metabolism at
boston college so please help me in
welcoming the man with over 180
peer-reviewed publications and the
author of cancer as metabolic disease
professor thomas seyfried professor
seyfried welcome to the show oh thank
you very much it's a real pleasure to to
be here today yeah thank you for taking
the time to come
so i always like to start with
everybody's sort of origin story how did
you get into researching the ketogenic
diet and cancer metabolism
well
when when i when i was uh on the faculty
at yale
uh in the department of neurology uh
epilepsy uh was the dominant uh
area of research and uh clinical focus
in that department with gilbert glasser
as the chair at that time
and um
you know having come from biochemistry
and genetics at illinois i was i was
encouraged to uh do as much work in
epilepsy as you possibly could
and i started to map genes and seizure
models and these kinds of things i
wasn't really um
in fact i wrote a small grant for
ketogenic diet
for the yale um a medical school and
they said no one is interested in
ketogenic diets at yale university
so
i said okay and then when i came to
boston college you know we were doing
genetics of epilepsy quite uh quite
extensively published a lot of papers on
on the genetics of audiogenic seizures
different kinds of epilepsy models the
el epilepsy model one of my students
um said to me uh marianna detroit but
she said oh you know there's a big thing
uh out in seattle uh on ketogenic diets
and and i wrote and they said they have
monies to support me to go there and i
said i don't waste your time nobody's
interested in ketogenic diets
from from my from the the work i had at
yale right so she said oh no no so jim
abrams uh uh who had started the charlie
foundation and was the movie producer of
different hollywood movies and his
friend meryl streep
um they were doing first do no harm the
movie and then and then they
uh were more or were starting to gain a
research interest in ketogenic diets so
mariana had come back to me saying we
really have to start doing this
ketogenic diet stuff again
despite my reluctance
and then we started to find out that it
really worked in stopping the epileptic
seizures in the el mouse
and then we found out the same thing
though that if you calorie restrict you
can get the same results so we were
publishing uh on epilepsy it did a lot
of work on eppley pub then i started to
get really deep into the mechanisms of
how the ketogenic diet might might stop
epileptic seizures uh i was working uh
for i was consulting with george cahill
who who was the president of the joslin
diabetes uh center there in boston and
and richard veach
so i started to talk to these two folks
uh they were the world leaders on
understanding how ketones uh were
operating to influence brain function
and
and different different uh biochemistry
uh of of many different systems
and um i started to learn from beech and
cahill the power of what these ketones
were doing
and at the same time we were
investigating angiogenesis in cancer
uh because we have i developed some of
the best animal models for brain cancer
that exist
that i developed at yale university to
study gangliosites in brain cancer so we
started when things started to come
together let's try what happens if we do
a ketogenic diet on a mouse with brain
tumors and we actually started first
with uh calorie restriction because it
was working so well against the
epileptic seizures and the mechanism was
simply laid it related to low glucose
elevated ketones
so uh as soon as we started to do that
with the brain tumors uh we noticed
uh our dramatic finding and then there
was a drug company that came
to us because i was working a lot on
gangly size and this drug company said
oh we have a drug uh that that is that
um you know stops gangliocide
biosynthesis so i tried it on the uh
on the mice that had brain tumors and lo
and behold this drug that was supposed
to stop ganglioside biosynthesis also
significantly shrunk
the brain tumors as the company got
really excited they gave me like 250
dollars
to uh investigate this drug uh
which we which we didn't know
a lot more money and and that rather
than taste disease or something oh yeah
yeah
so so so anyway listen to this it turns
out we gave the drug
to the mice uh and and and they were
eating and we saw them eating uh but
their body weight was getting lower and
uh the tumors were shrinking and then
this um dr mukherjee came in she who
does a lot of work on calorie
restrictions she says you know why don't
we why don't we set up an experiment
where we match the body weight uh with
the drug
uh
uh uh just just take another mouse don't
feed him as much and and just see match
and the exact the tumors went to the
exact same size
so we said what is this drug doing
and we found out the drug blocks um
sucrases in the stomach
so the animal can't digest his food so
the drug was causing calorie restriction
so
as soon as i told the company that the
the mechanism of action wasn't through
ganglioside biosynthesis but calorie
restriction they didn't want any part of
this anymore pull the plug on the
research and that was the last i heard
from
so uh they were not excited at all to
know that their drug was operational
primarily by lowering blood sugars
yeah that's fascinating i definitely
want to circle back on a few points but
to that point um you know many many
chemotherapeutics
cause things like vomiting and gi
distress do you think that there is a
confounding factor of a little bit of
caloric restriction with the
chemotherapy agents that are out today
yeah i do um but it's very hard to
design an experiment uh to test that but
uh nausea vomiting um
uh
uh diarrhea uh all of these uh fatigue
uh all of these uh adverse effects of
chemo are all are all different kinds of
uh calorie restrictions yeah um and i've
spoken to some people that contact me
who have brain tumors and they were
taking temozolomide which is a standard
drug for brain cancer
and this one
person got so sick he just laid in bed
for a whole week just drank water
um
and he noticed a tremendous uh he got
really felt really healthy after with
the team as the only one they the but he
he said it it shrunk the tumor so
because he wasn't eating i mean he's
taking temozolomide got so sick he never
ate so the bottom line is he's getting
calorie restriction because the drug
made him sick so i said what do you
think would have happened if you didn't
take the temozolomide and just did that
oh no doctors i had to take the
temozolomide but um yeah it's
temozolomide but it's not only uh tmz
it's a lot of different drugs
and um
you know it's a big deal right
yeah they have a bunch of them okay
about while babicism it is bad okay okay
a bevicism it is an anti-angiogenesis
drug
um
uh uh bevacizamid is avastin
it's a maid it's made to block blood
vessels now
i i said it's uh unethical uh in fact
even immoral to use avastin on people um
because what happens is it pushes the it
makes the tumor look good on a on a scan
uh but forces the cells uh to to invade
throughout the whole cortex
and there's been several papers
published by different groups
um
so so the patient looks
at the image and says oh yeah it looks
like the avastin is working
and uh what it's doing is simply it's
simply a facilitating tumor
so it's almost like you know sign your
death certificate after you take avastin
um because it's the worst thing and they
they stopped it for breast cancer
because it was causing more harm than it
was doing good but they continue to use
it for brain cancer for reasons i don't
know because i've looked at all the
trials it doesn't do anything
so and it also causes the tumor cells to
spread through your brain
and this has been published in the
scientific literature by a number of
groups so why would you want to use any
drug on a person to spread their tumor
cells through the brain doesn't make
sense right
all right well they do it and uh and i i
called him out on it but you know um
they continue to do it it's a very pro
it's it's a it generates a lot of
revenue it's a very good drug for
revenue generation but it doesn't do
anything to help the patients yeah every
now and then you find a person like
survive investing but
it's usually a pretty devastating drug
so but that's a different um
uh
the the one with um oh uh martha stewart
right she went to jail for a while from
incl something like this so i checked
into that drug and that worked through
calorie restriction as well
they you know they they notified her in
advance that the drug wasn't working as
well as it should so she pulled the
stock out of them
everything here is revenue generation
either got to make money or protect what
money you have right
so
so you know you go back and look at the
actual paper in clinical cancer research
on what that um that drug was i can't
remember it was it was i can't remember
the name of the drug right now but it
was the one that martha stewart had to
go to jail for so
um
you know
when you go back when you know how to
when you know how to out evaluate the
data you can kind of predict what the
drug is doing right yes the answer to
your question is probably a lot of these
cancer drugs will have some therapeutic
benefit by the making the patient sick
and not eating and therefore you're
going to get some benefit from the fact
that you're not not eating right
so
before we jump right into cancer
metabolism i want to circle back on
something i find it interesting that
both you and dom actually started with
epilepsy research
and um
when we were talking to dom you
mentioned that there are cases where
people go on the ketogenic diet
for their epilepsy and then they get off
the ketogenic diet and then the epilepsy
never returns i was wondering whether
you had a hypothesis for why that
happens
you know uh we don't
and um you know that here's the
situation uh
studying ketogenic diets with epilepsy
will be uh
an exciting but never-ending story i i
think that what you just mentioned like
how is it possible that a person could
like be cured of their epilepsies uh not
it doesn't happen to everyone for sure
but it certainly happens to enough that
it's it's been noted
uh in the in in the in the publications
but the mechanism by which that happens
is is not known and nor do we really
understand the mechanism by which a
ketogenic diet stops epilepsy
and the reason why i get excited about
it for epilepsy because um everybody was
focusing on the genes for epilepsy and
it turned out that a ketogenic diet
could
manage to some extent a broad range of
epileptic seizures regardless of what
the ideological origin of the seizures
happened to be so with some really
general
mechanism uh that just
lowered the sensitivity the excitability
of neurons in some way and i i know a
number of investigators that will be
continuing to study uh this but i think
there's so many different mechanisms
that could come to play in trying to
determine how a ketogenic diet might
stop this form of epilepsy or that form
of epilepsy
um and therefore research will be
continuing in that field
greatly for cancer
it's so much clear more clear on how
ketogenic diets calorie restrictions
stop seizures um the mechanisms are are
very clear to understand uh and it also
works against all different kinds of
cancers so but it's very clear to me
the problem is you have to convince the
field of a very simple explanation for
how it works and that seems to be a
bigger challenge than actually knowing
how it works right so let's get into
that i think a good place to start would
just be with
dr otto warburg and talking about you
know his work and then
um the
warburg effect essentially and then how
that relates to cancer metabolism for
for the people that are hearing this for
the first time
yeah well uh water otto warburg was
absolutely correct in his in his uh
discovery for the origin of cancer
uh it is it is a chronic damage to the
oxidative phosphorylation system forcing
the cell into a fermentation metabolism
um
you know how the how how the damage to
the mitochondria can come about is we
call the oncogenic paradox
and then some people could get cancer
from viral infections like hepatitis c
and
uh some people can uh put it these are
all risk factors by the way
risk factors that would uh disrupt
oxidative phosphorylation forcing the
cell into a fermentation uh mechanism so
so you can see intermittent hypoxia
uh chronic inflammation
um carcinogen exposure to carcinogens
um you know even even even rare
inherited mutations that affect the
function of the uh mitochondria all of
these are are are risk factors
and um
and that was what albert zinc jurgy
found to be what would he call the
oncogenic paradox
um and and and in uh sid mukherjee's
book uh the emperor of all maladies uh
he also struggled uh to try to
understand this paradox how is it
possible that so many things in the
environment uh or chemicals or whatever
could cause cancer through a common
pathophysiological mechanism
and that common pathophysiological
mechanism is is the gradual the gradual
replacement of oxidation phosphorylation
with substrate level phosphorylation
which is the fermentation uh mechanism
the problem today
is
most people
consider warburg wrong because many of
these cancer cells
take in oxygen
and the problem there is is at which
they
they use the seahorse instrument a
variety of other instruments
it's important that i publish this over
and i tell people this oxygen
consumption does not equal
uh oxidative phosphorylation in cancer
cells in cancer cells it's it's
they're disconnected so and this is what
confuses
so many people they've already made a
decision oh warburg has to be wrong
because the cancer cell is taken in
oxygen uh it's sometimes equal to that
of a normal cell
wrong they're taken in oxygen it's not
connected to atp synthesis
we now show we have evidence
that the uh
oxygen the atp coming out of the
mitochondrion cancer cell is coming from
mitochondrial substrate-level
phosphorylation right um so this is
warburg did not know about this
warburg did not know this stuff came
after his his major contributions to the
field
so
uh what what led to tremendous confusion
was that cancer cells could continue to
produce atp
linked or in association with oxygen
consumption but we're showing that the
oxygen consumption is not is not the
mechanism responsible
uh for atp synthesis
oxygen consumption produces reactive
oxygen species it doesn't produce atp so
the atp is actually coming from uh
glutamine through the glutaminolysis
pathway uh producing large amounts of
atp
and substrate level phosphorylation
so so he didn't know about that uh and
that was we we now have uh defined the
missing link in warburg's theory he's
absolutely correct origin of cancer is
is chronic damage to oxidative
phosphorylation with compensatory
fermentation and the fermentation is the
glycolytic pathway as well as the
glutaminolysis pathway both providing
uh
most of the atp from our studies is
coming from the mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorylation
the glucose carbons are used
predominantly for biomath synthesis as
others several others in the field have
shown so the energy does not come much
from uh glycolysis
mainly because of the pk m2 isoform so
you produce a lot of lactic acid with
very little atp
so what is the what is all this glucose
being all the glucose is doing is
largely for biomass without without
biomass you can't grow and without
energy definitely cannot grow but if you
have energy and biomass you're going to
grow like crazy and the two fuels
driving the cancer is clearly glucose
and glutamine so you can clearly manage
cancer by depriving depriving cancer
cells of glucose and glutamine
simultaneously right not difficult so if
i could just take a step back it sounds
like um for anybody hearing this for the
first time
essentially with cellular respiration
normally in the presence of oxygen you
undergo aerobic respiration which tends
to occur in the mitochondria through the
electron transport chain
but you're saying in cancer cells what
happens is even in the presence of
oxygen
the
process for which they form atp would be
anaerobic pathways or fermentation being
glycolysis or um through substrate level
phosphorylation is that yeah that's
correct okay and and what happens now is
you you only use a small part of the tca
cycle
so the tca is no longer a cycle um these
are pathways that
so so so you have glu glutamine
metabolized to glutamate metabolized to
alpha ketoglutarate metabolized to
succinyl coa and then to succinate and
that step there the succinyl coated
succinate is generating uh the majority
of atp in the cancer cell and as the
result of this they dump out succinct
acid outside the cell
so and a lot a number of investigators
have shown that succinic acid is
accumulating in various cancer cells and
sucks and and succinate stabilizes uh
hif1 alpha which then allows the
glycolytic pathway to proceed at full at
full uh throttle
so so uh um so the two the two pathways
uh for biomass and energy are tightly
linked
uh through their metabolites and
and and and we know this listen we have
cancer cells now everybody knows cancer
cells can grow in hypoxia i mean really
low levels of oxygen 0.1
and they can grow in cyanide okay so uh
we we we have our cancer cells growing
and cyanide and hypoxia grown fine
as long as they have uh the glucose and
the glutamine they can grow in without
oxygen so uh you tell me any cell any
cell uh a normal cell that can survive
in cyanide right how is the cancer cell
surviving in cyanide if they have normal
oxidative phosphorylation right but they
don't so they don't use oxfords they use
fermentation mechanisms and the
fermentation mechanisms are very simple
it's glucose and glutamine
and if if you target the glucose and
glutamine simultaneously you're going to
get spectacular results in managing
cancer right so i was wondering i think
there's a gap in my knowledge that i'm
trying to understand so
with cancer cells when they're shunting
towards um aerobic fermentation
essentially
what then is the steps that causes
cancer from there is it just decreased
amount of atp is it increased lactate
levels and causing an acidotic state and
how does that then relate to
um
essentially causing dna damage um to
cause mutations
yeah well you have you have several uh
concepts over
overlapping in your question
so um the dna damage comes largely from
the ross that are produced
in the cell rusts are carcinogenic and
mutagenic there's
large numbers of papers in the
scientific literature showing that
um
so so the dna damage is downstream uh
effects that's not the cause the effects
it's an effect and the nuclear transfer
mitochondrial transfer experiments uh
pretty much uh solidify that right
actually do you want to go into that
really quickly well i i think it's
important to know okay that's great dna
damage um what is so the key thing is
what is
okay we have what is responsible for the
dysregulated cell growth that's this is
another interesting thing before we go
into the nuclear transfer experiments
sure but the you know okay great you
know um mitochondria damage how is that
going to lead to disregard because the
signature phenotype of cancer is cell
division out of control this regulated
cell growth how do you get dysregulated
cell growth from damage to the
mitochondria right
so you have to realize that all the
cells that existed on the planet uh
before oxygen came into the atmosphere
were all dysregulated in their growth
there was unbridled proliferation and
they were all using a fermentation
mechanism because there was no oxygen
yet so when oxygen came into the
atmosphere it's only then that you began
to produce ros as signaling molecules
that allowed metazoans metazoans to form
so the differentiated state of our cells
is controlled largely by the
mitochondria the mitochondria also
control the genes that regulate the cell
cycle so what happens when the
mitochondria become no longer
operational within the cell they fall
back on their ancient pathway of
fermentation which is
linked to dysregulated cell growth so
all this stuff makes real sense if you
understand evolutionary biology what i
find in my discussions with students or
with physicians wherever most people
don't even understand evolutionary
biology it's that it's actually a black
you know yeah it's very hard to convince
people of mechanisms when they have no
clue about evolution and believe me when
you see people writing these different
kinds of things you already know they're
using the um teleological explanations
using all this kind of stuff
um so so once you understand
evolutionary biology understand the
function of these different organelles
and how they all came to came to pass
you can put this whole puzzle together
with with not too much difficulty
um but you know the nuclear transfer
experiments we're clearly showing the
beauty of these experiments they were
asking you know what what do gene
mutation can gene mutations regulate
development but the other the evidence
that they got was that um
they were actually destroying the
somatic mutation theory of cancer
by the very by the very observations
that they were making in transferring
tumor nuclei into normal cytoplasm and
and normal uh
nuclei into tumor cytoplasm you know
doing doing frog work mouse work
different cancer work all doing
different model systems and majority of
these people coming to a similar
conclusion
that um there's something in the
cytoplasm that's playing a bigger role
in in driving dysregulated cell growth
than there was in the nucleus and um uh
when you look at that i i had long
discussions with um
uh dr kimmel
uh uh who who did the frog work he even
told me he showed me pictures of frogs
that were developed from the nucleus of
a of a kidney tumor
and he said you know frogs can
regenerate their tail and limbs and
things and he would cut the tail off
this frog this tadpole that was
generated from a cancer nucleus
and the tadpole completely uh regrew the
tail exactly exactly as it should have
been despite the fact that this this is
dysregulated this is regulated cell
growth from the nucleus of a
dysregulated cell can you believe this
so clearly it was all in the cytoplasm
wasn't it the the the the genes were not
controlling the the this the regulation
of the growth so uh when i told him it's
the mitochondria he was like really
excited yes he says yes you're
absolutely correct it is the
mitochondria they're doing all this so
that's a hard pill to swallow
uh because you realize the the uh most
of the stuff in cancer is based on the
somatic mutation theory and if the
semantic mutation theory is incorrect
what is the probability of developing
new drugs that are going to be really
effective if the very foundation upon
which you're building these drugs is
wrong
it's not going to work
so simple this whole thing is like
incredibly simple and yet people can't
understand it i don't know i find myself
uh you know i sometimes i question my
own sanity so that am i going crazy here
right
so just to reiterate for the audience so
they did studies where
they took the nucleus which is where
your genes are held of a cancer cell and
they put it into a healthy normal
cytoplasm and essentially that cell
never formed into cancer but they then
did the opposite where they took um
essentially uh cancer cytoplasm
and then transferred a normal nucleus
into the cancer cytoplasm and then it
developed into cancer
and um that's kind of what the nuclear
transfer experiments were right yeah
mitochondria too yeah if you take
an indolent
uh slow-growing tumor and then you put
in the mitochondria from a rapidly
growing tumor the slow-growing tumor
becomes extremely rapid and if you take
a rapidly growing tumor this was all
done by by the group at baylor college
of medicine beneath kerapattu and others
if you put normal mitochondria into the
cyto replace them if this is a hard
experiment to do mitochondrial
replacement experiments are much more
difficult than nuclear transfer
experiments
so if you put the normal mitochondria
into the cytoplasm of a very aggressive
tumor you can shut it down it becomes
growth regulated again so when you when
you put all these things together it's
clear the mitochondria are calling the
shots in this disease cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease
unambiguously and once you realize that
then the strategies for managing the
disease become so simple and easy
non-toxic
so
and that's the that's the hardest pill
for people to swallow that this cancer
is not as complicated as as many people
make it out to be right and the other
thing too is all the cancers that i've
looked at all the major cancers
they all have damage to the structure of
the mitochondria so they're all
fermenting and and they're all they're
all sucking down glucose and they're all
sucking down glutamine and there's no
other amino acids that can replace
glutamine so in the same in the same
robust level
and then you also have to look at the at
the logistics of this what is the amino
acid most abundant in the body it's the
glutamine not these other amino acids
they're very low so in order to grow the
beast you have to have an inventory of
fuels and the biggest fuel is glucose
and glutamine and they're both being
fermented and the cancer is growing and
nobody's targeting glucose and glutamine
in any of the clinical trials so what do
you expect right so let's go ahead and
talk about that um let's talk about the
press pulse protocol that you guys have
been developing and um maybe you could
talk us through
briefly the mechanism of how ketogenic
diet and caloric restriction fits into
press pulse
yes so the press pulse um
we develop i developed that from the
concepts of aryans and um uh one of the
authors for the extermination of species
during the earth's evolutionary history
um it turns out that you know chronic
stress will eliminate the weak
uh a pulse stress
will eliminate uh many but not all
organisms
it's it's only when you have a chronic
stress together with a catastrophic
pulse that you
cause extinctions and we we developed
that uh concept for how we destroy
cancer because um you can't go into
targeting tumor cells like they do in
the clinic with a toxic drug radiation
this this
this
will not work for for for many people
um so what you need to and you find out
that many of the cancer patients suffer
from all kinds of other maladies
sometimes it could be type 2 diabetes
high blood pressure hypertension uh many
many folks that have cancer have many
other maladies not just the fact that
they have the tumor
um so we we look at a whole pro profile
and we say okay uh this p this person
needs to be brought back into metabolic
homeostasis
so by doing that we either use low
carbohydrate diets
depending on the health health status of
the patient when they first appear so uh
the press part of this is to lower the
sugar elevate the ketones to bring the
patient back into a more healthy state
than they were when they first presented
also by lowering glucose and elevating
ketones
um
we put metabolic pressure pressure
pressure onto the tumors they don't grow
as fast uh
microenvironmental acidification goes
down there's a lot of anti-inflammatory
uh benefits uh from this and the body
starts to get healthier and healthier
uh now now we launch the pulses
uh which are strategies that will attack
and destroy
uh the tumor cells are gradually so we
can use diet drug cocktails that will
target and hit glutamine dependent cells
glucose-dependent cells you put the
patients in hyperbaric oxygen which will
cause us oxidative stress more in the
tumor cells than in the normal cells
just like radiation but radiation
doesn't discriminate between tumor cell
and normal stones the hyperbaric oxygen
while under nutritional ketosis will
largely destroy cancer cells especially
when the glucose levels are are reduced
just like doug spitz in his and his
group shown out in iowa the lower
glucose oxidative stress goes up put a
patient in hyperbaric oxygen the
oxidative stress is going to be even
greater the ketones are reducing the
stress in the normal cells it's a
beautiful elegant non-toxic system for
eliminating tumor cells
it's a gradual process it requires
participation on the part of the patient
they have to be some somewhat compliant
with these things and it also requires
people to understand what the hell is
going on with this strategy you know you
just don't sit your ass down there and
get nuked and poisoned you have to know
what you're doing
right so uh and then and the attending
physicians need to know this it's a
mitochondrial metabolic disease
dependent on glucose and glutamine and
they can't burn ketones so you put all
that together and you have a strategy a
press pulse strategy for managing the
majority of cancers in patients
if i could just talk about the
press portion for a moment is there
is there any difference or would you
recommend using exogenous ketones during
the press portion or does it have to be
all and endogenously made no no you can
use you can use uh and
uh ketones
um
exogenous ketone supplements okay the
question is do you want to use uh
racemic keystone dl forms of mixture do
you want to use the d form the d form is
your ultimately the best um
the d form will be the
the form that we produce naturally in
the liver is d beta hydroxy butyrate uh
that that molecule is different from l
uh uh beta hydroxybutyrate the l the l
is beta oxidized
um and then uh you don't get the you
don't you don't get the energetic
advantage from the l uh uh form as you
do from the from the d form it's a it's
a it's a sophisticated biochemistry that
uh um uh richard veach the dr vic shared
with me he's published it it's it's
it's a little detailed but but bottom
line it's it's the natural ketone body
if you can take a a solution of natural
ketone bodies the the d beta
hydroxybutyrate while in a low
carbohydrate diet you will definitely
elevate your ketones to a higher level
than you would if you were just on the
diet by itself there's no question about
that
for those who aren't aware the d and the
l are enantiomers meaning that their
mirror images of each other kind of like
your left and right hands
is what we're talking about with the d
and l
um
so i was also wondering how low is the
glucose supposed to go for optimal
press
well you know it's the
the lower the better um and of course
the study done by drink
uh in the 70s where where he took the
obese uh people
and put him on a water-only fast for 21
days
and then shot him up with high-dose
insulin
um they were able to get blood sugars
down to 0.5 millimolar 9 milligrams per
decade deca leader without any cognitive
decline at all and this is what cahill
was always telling me he says if you can
push those if you can get your ketones
up you can push glucose down to barely
detectable levels
so uh but you have to you otherwise it
would kill the patient so so but the
ketones uh replace glucose for the brain
so the brain is is perfectly uh capable
of burning ketones as an alternative
fuel for glucose and if that's the case
you really don't need glucose so uh um
and that's why these people will get so
our our group in turkey puts patients on
ketogenic diets ketone supplements and
then it does insulin potentiation
studies things like this the question is
what
here's the situation with press pulse we
have not yet perfected dosage timing and
scheduling for the different parts of
the of the process i'm working with
groups of physicians in various clinics
uh to work and in our lab ourselves here
ourselves uh uh diet drug uh cocktails
using dosage timing and scheduling you
know what is what is the best um
level of glucose and ketones that will
make the drugs work best uh
does this drug work better with this
other drug or with the diet in between
so it's a you it's mostly we call it
unsexy science you can't get it funded
for this stuff right this is ultimately
what's going to solve the problem and
you can't get money for it
oh you know you have to integrate all
these different pathways through the
goddamn pathways you're trying to keep
the patient alive in a quality of life
what are you worried about all these
signaling pathways we we have to know
that this will solve the problem and for
whatever reason
uh that end goal uh is not considered
important uh dosa's timing and
scheduling is not sexy science that will
ultimately lead to the resolution and
long-term management of the disease but
it's trial and error and every person's
a little different from somebody else so
you might have to you might have to
tweak uh the diet drug cocktail a little
bit different for one person for another
and you know we can work all that out it
just takes time yeah i was wanting to
touch on timing actually and i was
wondering how long you had to have been
on um in ketosis for because you know
speaking to dom it sounds like there's
uh about three months before you're
fully keto adapted does that play any
role as far as the press polls protocol
no i don't think it's that long
we're seeing better now i think what we
do is we we put people in low carb zero
zero carb diets you can do you know you
can eat whatever you want just don't
take in any carbs
and and then what happens is they they
within a within a 14-day period you can
start to see the the ketones going up
and the glucose going down it doesn't go
down as much but then um you know you
step into a water only fast at that
point it becomes a much less stressful
thing and then once you see that and
then you can take the exogenous ketones
when you're in that ketogenic state
that's when you bring the drugs on and
the drugs are delivered through the at
least to the brain
and and three times more uh passes
through the blood brain but it's
unbelievable these diets are acting like
facilitators of drug delivery to the
brain so we published two papers on this
showing how small the ketogenic diets
can facilitate delivery of small
molecules through the blood-brain
barrier so what are you wasting all your
time trying to figure out drugs how to
bust the blame blood brain barrier when
you already have it here
um and then when in ketosis with these
drugs
these tumor cells can't survive they're
being really hammered big time and your
normal cells are not are not being
harmed at all by this
so it sounds like because the patient
has become keto adapted when you do do
the pulse and you block the glutamine
there as the healthy cells the non-tumor
cells are essentially
um protected against the pulse because
they're able to use ketones whereas
cancer cells are not yes
yes is that is that it's not that
complicated right
well would you put it that way but uh no
no no
i'm telling you what i just told you
cannot be accepted by the majority of
people in the oncology field
they don't know about it they don't want
to know about it or they think oh it has
to be more complicated than that oh you
tell me how
i don't know
yeah yeah and how does how does the um
glucose ketone index play into that i
know you mentioned timing and um dosing
is that still the one well
it's it's simply it's simply a a
quantitative gauge
to let someone know whether whether they
really are in a a ketotic state
um because you're you're actually
quantifying the level of uh the
millimolar level of ketone and
millimolar level of glucose in the
individual's blood at at a given time
and i and dominic adam and i know that
uh for hyperbaric oxygen as a
as another pulse
um we like to have the p the patient
in the hot during the course of the day
it wax and wanes as as your gki because
we we've done this in a number of people
and you can get a different gki in the
morning than you can get in the late
afternoon or vice versa
it can change during the course of a day
so we always tell people if they want to
do hyperbaric oxygen along with their uh
as part of the press pulse they should
they should go into the chamber
uh at the time of the day when they have
the lowest gki because that that tells
you now that you're going to put the
maximum oxidative stress uh on the tumor
cells and that has to be determined for
each individual patient themselves
so a patient has to say over a course of
a week or two you know this is when i
noticed that my gki during the course of
the the day is the lowest so you
schedule your uh your hyperbaric oxygen
during that time right i mean this is
again uh you're going to get the maximum
benefit if you understand your body
and you understand the patient needs to
understand have to play a role in
understanding some of their own
physiology to maximize this therapeutic
approach yeah that's fascinating
um and you've been working with your
colleagues over in turkey with and
they've been implementing this is that
correct what are their results have they
found anything that they've been
successful yeah they've been publishing
some results uh and i've been
participatory in some of those
publications not all of them
um they're you know they're still
they're doing a hodgepodge of uh
combining standard treatments uh with
keto
with hypothermia uh they they do a
variety of different uh
techniques
um they use lower doses of chemo
uh and i even asked them i said why are
you using any chemo it's a poison right
so they said well you have to then close
our clinic down if they don't they don't
do something standard of care right no
standard of care right standard standard
of death is more like it so uh you know
you don't poison and irradiate people to
make them healthy i mean right you just
don't you shouldn't do things like this
uh yet people do it because they don't
understand how you can do something how
you can get the result doing something
different but um and nevertheless they
use lower doses they use uh insulin
potentiation hypothermia and variety of
things
and they published the paper not long
ago on the breast cancer page is a
fascinating fascinating story a woman
with a triple negative well it
metastasized the brain you know a
general metastatic problem
uh brutalized by the system uh from ohio
this woman you can read about her it's
published um uh was a curious journal
one of these draw i can't remember but
anyway i was shocked when i was reading
the case report because the pet scan
looked like she was lit up like a
christmas tree i mean this was really a
devastating
large metastatic spread throughout her
body
she almost died on the plane ride over
to turkey and and she was in the
intensive care there for a month or so
uh just trying to bring her keep her
alive i guess and then when she finally
recovered they put her in the in the in
the metabolic therapy
um started to do remarkably well uh came
back to ohio and the last i got was a
picture of her and her husband in hawaii
um and they said
they i don't remember what hospital it
was in in ohio
uh but they thought that she would have
less than a month to live
uh based on all their
or the fact that she failed all these
treatments
um and the cancer was spreading uh
wildly
and yet now here she is alive now it's
not clear
how i mean if she's cured i don't know i
mean if she dies at 90 years old from
like heart failure then you know she
must have been cured from her cancer um
but but you can't know if anyone's ever
cured until they die of old age from
something other than cancer
right right i mean that's the bottom
line
yeah so uh you know our man pablo kelly
was diagnosed with terminal brain cancer
and now he's just about eight years out
and i said what at what point do we
consider the ter the cancer not terminal
right
so uh you know
glioblastoma oh yeah most people say oh
it's a terminal cancer well he's still
going
he has a website telling everybody what
he's doing how he's doing and he says i
know i was diagnosed with terminal brain
well yeah well eventually we're all
terminal right we're all going to die of
something
so um so i don't know if we should be
using such terms like this in light of
the new
the new evidence that we can keep people
alive far longer than what was uh uh
previously uh thought
not to be possible and so in in pablo's
case did he end up
just essentially switching to a
ketogenic diet instead of undergoing um
you know radiation chemo and then
debulked is that what happened with yeah
okay so what he contacted me right after
his diagnosis i mean he had been
suffering from different kinds of
seizures and things until they finally
did a pet scan
and
found out a large lesion in his brain
they took a a biopsy of him that was
back in 2014 august 2014
and uh
classified it as a glioblastoma
and then uh he has a story he's on
various uh
uh uh podcasts and things he gave a d or
a blow-by-blow description of what they
did to this guy but but he
bottom line he rejected he didn't want
radiation he didn't take any steroids he
didn't take any temozolomide didn't take
anything
uh but he was um he he threw his body he
threw himself into this
uh ketosis this ketotic state very
aggressively
at the beginning also he had the idh1
mutation which is a therapeutic uh
mutation it's like a drug that targets
glycolysis and glutamineolysis can you
believe this
so uh um so he has this very therapeutic
mutation he's younger
he avoids uh radiation and chemo that
will accelerate and make the micro
environment acidified and actually
contribute to the rapid recurrence of
the tumor so he avoided all he had
certain advantages
and he avoided other things that would
have put him at a demise but then
uh the tumor did grow it never
disappeared
uh and then in 2017
uh we looked at the scans my colleagues
you know i don't profess to know
anything about all i can see is an image
on the skin but the guys who look at
these closely can see small changes
and they noticed that the tumor was
continuing to grow
and uh so they did the debulking uh his
first the bulking was three years post
diagnosis with the glioblastoma so he
was keeping it growing very very slow
using a basically a press pulse but he
wasn't using any drugs um
that he could have used that we now know
would have been far more effective but
still
they debunked it again confirmed the
diagnosis of gliobla idh1 positive
glioblastoma
um
and then he transitioned back on to the
metabolic therapy and he's doing really
well then 2021 just last year he had a
second debulking
uh still the same so what it is it's a
indolent glioblastoma it's not growing
very fast right that's fascinating and
normally gbms um like you said are
terminal i think their
life expectancy is in
about one year or so well for his age
group it could be two years yeah um
but the fact that he's out almost eight
years now
and as a matter of fact uh i just
attended the iaomt
meeting
oral not toxicology he
pablo now feels that some of his
headaches are coming from the mercury in
his teeth
so i went to this meeting where they
have all these specialists who remove
mercury from your teeth put yours right
so i got him in touch with some
physician who does this but i said to
pablo i said you know you're the first
guy on the planet with a glioblastoma
that really has to worry about mercury
in his teeth
it's a good that's a good problem to
have
i think most people don't live long
enough to worry about the mercury that's
right i think it is important to note
for the people in the audience that the
ketogenic diet isn't necessarily going
to shrink the tumor it might slow down
the growth of the tumor because it
sounds like tumor can still use
glutamine and so there's these two
pathways right i mean not just glucose
and so there's still glutamine that it
can use
um
so was do you know on histology for
pablo's case was there any necrosis from
just
being on ketogenic diet was that
it looked there was some there was some
necrosis you can look at the uh at the
path reports
first i didn't believe um when when when
i got the images from uh his pathologist
uh dr shavani in in england
um
you know i i said well i you know
shivani's opinion i i that's you know
because every but these pathologists
also all sometimes have different
opinions about uh what something might
be
so i took the slides and i sent them to
my colleagues at upenn
uh and had the pathologist
neuropathologists look at he said this
is definitely um gbm
so i still wasn't convinced so i had the
slides sent to um my colleague joe
maroon former president of the
neurosurgical society of america
uh and had his pathologists there they
all controlled so i had three groups of
people
um
because you know what what happens when
you get a long-term survivor they say i
never had gbm in the first place right
that's the worst thing they say i never
had it right so well i made sure that he
did have and um
and there was no there was no ambiguity
they all said that he that this is an
invasive gbm it didn't have as much
hemorrhagic necro it didn't have as much
angiogenic proliferation yet yeah
um but it was idh it was not methylated
it was idh so i said to myself what the
hell is this idh1 say you know oh it's
two hours you know it's uh it brings up
two hydroxyl glutamate all this so uh
but people with idh1 mutations generally
have their life expectancy is twice as
long as those who don't have the wild
type allele so what's going on with that
why people with idh1 mutations live
longer than people who don't have the
idh they have the wild type so now
papers are coming out um
uh showing if you look at the if you
look at where does the two hydroxy
glutamate come it comes from
alpha-ketoglutarate well
alpha-ketoglutarate is an upstream
precursor for substrate-level
phosphorylation in the mitochondria so
you're going to actually reduce
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation because you're diverting
the upstream substrate into two hydroxy
glutamate not only that two hydroxyl
glutamate destabilizes hiv if is driving
the glycolytic pathway i said are you
kidding me i said this drug this this
mutation is acting like a drug that's
simultaneously targeting glycolysis and
glutamineolysis
right right so you can kind of
neutralize the effects of that drug by
radiating patients brains freeing up a
lot more glutamine that drives the tumor
i said when you start to realize the
biology the biology and biochemistry of
what these cancers are and what we're
doing to treat them
in the future they're going to say how
in the hell could we be so goddamn
stupid to do the stuff that we would do
into these people
so it's just going to take time for
people to understand what we're talking
about and i don't know how long that's
going to take but you know i look at
idh1 as a therapeutic mutation people
live twice as long if you have a gbm and
and the biochemical mechanisms are clear
so um why they have drug companies now
trying to develop drugs to target and
remove two hydroxy glutara that doesn't
make any sense does it if that two
hydroxyl glutamate is participatory in
the therapeutic benefit then why would
you want to take it away see this is the
thing
people do this you know so
yeah well that was entirely extremely
fascinating we're coming up on the hour
i'm going to leave some time for a q a
here but before i ask my final question
where can people find you or support
your research
well uh we we generate a lot of support
from travis foundation's uh
foundation for metabolic therapies
uh travis has been very good
we're getting support from a lot of
family foundations from a number of
family foundations
um
people make donations to the university
people make donations to travis
christopherson's foundation
and um
you know this allows us to do what we
really want to do
uh without without uh restrictions uh
and we get we get support from the
english uk foundation childhood cancer
foundations
um
you know the bottom line is if people
are really really interested in managing
the disease
and keeping people alive longer with a
higher quality of life and over and
longer overall survival
this is what's going to do it this
strategy is what will work for the
majority of patients how do i know this
because i'm i'm in contact with the
physicians and clinics that are doing
this
and i'm in contact with patients that
are doing it and feed me feeding me back
information so i know this strategy is
going to work it's going to work better
than anything that we have in the
clinics today once people understand how
to do this so we do all we work out all
the preclinical uh uh systems in the lab
here we have the best animal models for
glioblastoma uh we have a knowledge we
have the know-how we do doses timing and
scheduling we're building drug diet
cocktails and as soon as they're built
you want to talk
bench to bedside this is exactly what we
do bench to bedside and we have the and
we publish the papers when we get when
the patient lives long enough i didn't
want to publish pablo's paper until i
was sure he was living beyond five years
and he we have five years of data over
five years of data on this deck so uh um
so it's it's these are educational
important things for people really want
to look look into it yeah absolutely
and so for my final question if you had
a magic genie and you could wish for the
entire world to adopt one lifestyle
modification that would most greatly
impact their health what would it be
well i think it would probably be a
restriction of
carbohydrates i i i think that's having
a massive impact not only on cancer
uh because we did not evolve as a
species
to be eating large amounts of highly
processed carbohydrates in our diet
and i think it's not just cancer i think
it's uh alzheimer's disease
uh type two diabetes cardiovascular
disease they're all they're all kind of
linked to uh problems and diet lifestyle
and you know and it's hard because we
live in an
environment where the foods and the
stuff tastes so good
and you know we're sitting behind
computers all day long we're not
exercising as much as we used to sitting
in traffic i mean you put it all
together bad food bad bad lifestyle bad
issues and you're going to end up with
either cancer dementia type 2 diabetes
heart disease you name it they're all
these chronic diseases so um yeah but i
think if people are aware and they
understand the mechanisms then it
becomes a choice a personal choice
absolutely i love that awesome professor
sifrid thank you so much for being so
generous with your time and we're going
to switch over to the q a thanks so much
thanks all right
that was fantastic thanks so much um i
mean you have a lot of content out there
on on
the web spaces and so it's trying to
consume as much of it as possible and
you're so extremely generous with
you know providing your time to um
provide this knowledge to all of us so
if anybody has a question for professor
seyfried go ahead and unmute and ask
away i know that there's probably some
questions in the chat but uh
galia
welcome
um
hormonal replacement therapy
yeah i don't know uh
i i think um
[Music]
uh susie and susan wadia ells uh just
published a book that dealt with a lot
of uh these hormonal issues and i and i
think
uh she she cited reference papers
that address that more
um you know she was talking about um
birth control pills and certain other
hormone replacements and things like
this
and i can't be sure
uh what's going what's going going on
with that you know i don't know if that
you provoke cancer you stop cancer i
mean i i don't know
i really can't answer that question
out of curiosity with the press pulse
does that work with every every type of
tumor um i know you talk about gbm and
breast cancer but um does it work for
others as well well you know i i in our
big eye science paper
uh i went through all the major cancers
and and i looked at the electron
microscopy evaluations of all the major
cancers in human tissues
and all of them had and biochemistry
analysis of mitochondrial uh proteins
and enzymes
and every one of the major cancers had
defects in the mitochondria
so so that would mean that everyone had
to ferment
uh and and we all know that you know
from glycolysis
is big in almost all the major cancers
not all of them but most of them so
they're either using glucose or
glutamine other than that they can't use
anything else
uh in any in any great degree so yes all
these cancers are pretty much uh similar
in their underlying biochemical problem
so that means a sing a singular solution
a singular approach would have that
would be able to manage the majority of
cancers
yeah
discussing the
structure of mitochondria i know that i
think it was like lou cantley's group
had published something back you know a
while ago now but it was in science and
they were talking about that um
potentially that the warburg effect
wasn't necessarily
due to dysfunctional mitochondria um i
didn't quite get the punchline i was
trying to read up on it to be honest
right before this um do you remember
that paper are you familiar with that
yeah well i you know i um
i i don't know how if every cancer look
i looked at uh if every of the major
cancers that have been evaluated
have have clear
structural defects in the mitochondria
uh
do you do we deny that or do we ignore
it um how could you say cancer doesn't
have a mitochondrial defect when you're
looking at the tissue showing can it's
mitochondria defective in the tissue
that you're looking at right so i i
don't know
uh and i also know a lot of people just
ignore that that those facts
yeah um you know and and uh
you know albert lenninger wrote the book
in fact i i have it here uh structure
and structure determines mitochondrial
function
um and if you have structural defects
everybody knows if you have a structural
defect in the dna you get a mutation
that can sometimes have a problem so if
you structurally alter your
mitochondrial cristain mitochondrial
associated membranes are you assuming
that that has zero effect on the ability
of that organelle to perform normally
right but again this comes back to
evolutionary biology
i mean if the function of that or if if
the function is if
if the function is dependent on the
structure and the structure is abnormal
how do you say that mitochondria are not
defective in these these tumor cells
right
right yeah yeah no
it seems to make sense to me yeah well
you have to look at this a lot of people
they don't look at the actual em images
they don't have time to sit and start
looking at all these go look at all the
aem images and you're gonna say oh my
god look at these mitochondria they
don't look normal do they
so uh it's just black and white i don't
know i mean
as i said what i find is most people
don't study the literature they base
their information on hearsay and what
others have said
absolutely um do you have time for a
couple more questions or yeah sure
um does anybody have a question i've got
i've got plenty so i just want to leave
fire away fire away
in fact i love the questions i you know
sometimes i find somebody asked a
question that i i i really need to think
more about and then i'll spend time
going back into the literature to find
the answer
um but you know uh that's the only way
we can move the field forward if you're
able to provide
an intelligent answer to any kind of a
question
then that
illustrates that you might know what
you're talking about
um
and if you don't know the answer
you know i don't want a about
it but you know bottom line is that you
don't either know or i don't know
no i love that is there um
so we talked about the caloric
restriction ketogenic diet as part of a
therapy once you already have cancer
and i know that caloric restriction has
been shown to potentially um
slow down tumor growth but is it also
for prevention as well is there anything
that has indicated that it would prevent
cancer yeah sure well first of all
you have to say what is caloric you know
caloric restriction in a mouse is not
the same as calorie restriction and
human we'll post a big paper on this
and we found that a 40 calorie
restriction in the mouse which gives you
really really good effects on most
cancers
is comparable to water only fasting in
humans
so
um
and as a species we evolved to fast
humans can fast for long periods of time
uh because we had to do that to survive
uh in the environments that we
transitioned through during our
evolutionary past
so if the origin of cancer
is damaged to the oxidative
phosphorylation and structure and
function of the mitochondria then if you
keep your mitochondria healthy
it's very unlikely that you're going to
get cancer
so
uh how do you keep your mitochondria
healthy by burning ketones ketones will
reduce the production of reactive oxygen
species
so we all die from entropy disorder
so uh
and the order in our bodies are is
maintained by keeping us away from
equilibrium due to the energy efficiency
of our mitochondria so the better you
can keep your mitochondria healthy the
less likely you are to develop the
diseases that are linked to
mitochondrial dysfunction
right so so yes it's a powerful and you
know our closest relative the gorilla or
the chimpanzee and i wrote about they
rarely if ever get cancer they've had a
documented case of breast cancer and a
female chimpanzee and yet they're 98
similar to us in gene and protein
sequences so what the hell is going on
with the chimps
the problem is they're eating the same
they're having the same diet and
lifestyle they had when they first
evolved as a species we as a species are
not
in the same diet lifestyle that we had
when we evolved but but bananas aren't
ketogenic though right well they don't
eat a whole bun
you know
i mean it's like a treat right you know
you don't just throw in a whole branch
of bananas and that's your that's your
meal for the day you know it's you know
they're eating a variety of of things
and they're eating many of the same of
course they kill monkeys and eat raw
monkey meat in the jungle uh
as an occasional they eat insects and
they eat these kinds of things um but
they don't get breast they don't get
cancer and it's and it's if you look at
the foods they eat they have these
powerful uh protect mitochondrial
protectors
in the foods that they're eating so i i
was to the zoo down here in uh with the
franklin park zoo yeah it was just there
i was just there yeah you see the
gorillas so i talked to the vet in there
and i said yo what are you feeding oh we
feed them their natural diets right go
ask the veterinarian so i said why don't
you give them a mcdonald's hamburgers
and a big pizza every now and then oh no
she said that would be animal cruelty
said they would get sick yeah yeah i bet
i bet especially if you're not used to
eating that sort of thing
but it wouldn't take them long to get
used to it you put a couple of big jelly
filled donuts in there and see what
they're what their lifestyle yeah
actually heidi mentioned something about
dogs getting cancer and i saw one of
your presentations where um one of the
um
somebody that you knew had their dog had
this um some sort of nasal pharyngeal
carcinoma of some sort and switched to a
ketogenic diet and then like shrunk on
its own without any ratings oh yeah it
happens a lot yeah the dogs
yeah the dogs are loaded with cancer too
because of their we're feeding them the
same crap that we
you know all the dog foods are filled
with cream grains and corn and all kinds
of crap dog the wolf they all came from
the wolf when was the last time you saw
a pack of wolves attack a cornfield they
they don't eat corn right they kill
chickens and
another animal said so if you feed any
animal the wrong diet and keep them in a
cage they're going to get sick you're
not no exercising the bad food i mean
it's very clear right so yeah
speaking of dogs um stephanie has a
question but she actually does dog
agility competitions so no let's let's
go to stephanie who has a question
yeah that that's um
uh level two
i think
you know you know i i think people come
to realize that the the more
the fact that they're still alive and
say wow you know i'm doing better i feel
much better let me switch now to some
more organic keto and see how i do
um
and i think that's i think that's part
that will become an extremely important
part of the overall solution
uh as you as you start to see benefit
the benefit could be improved uh more
uh with recognition of those kinds of
foods that are even more healthy but yet
can sustain uh the therapeutic ketosis
so i think that's absolutely gone you
know we're still so much at the
beginning here
we we haven't really explored the value
of what you just uh suggested and i
think that's going to be an important
component as we move forward
yeah
steph and anecdotally i i
started
pretty much organic grass-fed etc etc
and i feel much better i feel like i can
eat more of this type of food and
um feel great whereas before i feel a
little bit sluggish and i've felt even
better since switching to keto i
actually switched to keto the day that
dom said he was gonna come on the show
because that'd be disingenuous i'd never
tried keto but to have don won so so i
went keto essentially that day i fasted
24 hours switched over to keto and i
felt pretty great so i think i'm going
to keep it up for a few more months here
and
go from there max did you have a
question
yeah well that's the that that i
mentioned was the
oncogenic paradox
uh which could be any number of things
uh in in the environment they're called
risk factors
they're they're uh cancer risk factors
so some people can be exposed to a
carcinogen in their workplace or or even
in their home car we call these
chemicals carcinogens and what i have
found in my in my research that the
carcinogens often cause a natural
fluorescence within the mitochondria so
the mitochondria are actually being
damaged by carcinogens
you can have intermittent hypoxia which
is known to damage mitochondria uh
chronic inflammation in the body like if
your c-reactive protein is elevated
that uh
those inflammatory cytokines that come
can damage mitochondria in a particular
cell of a particular organ in some
people
therefore the cancer could arise from
systemic inflammation
you can have viral some people get
cancer from various spiral infections
like hepatitis c papilloma virus these
are called oncogenic viruses because
either the virus themselves or the
product of the virus damaged the
oxidative phosphorylation and it's never
acute it's always chronic because as
warburg said anything that would cause
acute mitochondrial damage would lead to
cell death instantly because of the
apothic signaling cascades but if but
what happens is as the as the
mitochondria gradually over time
protracted loss of their ability to
generate uh uh
oxfords
uh they uh oncogenes upregulate um
fermentation mechanisms so making hef
and these things they're all upper
regulating uh transporters for glucose
and glutamine and things like this and
eventually the mitochondria lose their
ability to regulate apoptosis so now you
have a renegade cell a cell out of
control
so but it can happen from a number of
different things even the bracha one uh
these breast cancer genes and
leaf raw many and some of these other um
they damage mitochondria put the pa put
the cell at risk for forming a tumor
so
uh because we have not yet found a
mutation that's 100 percent penetrant
can we say that that mutation is
absolutely caused most mutations uh
inherited germline mutations are are
risk factors some of them can be
very good risk factors like leaf from
any and others very weak risk factors so
but they can still
and in the right environment with that
risk factor you can push the cell into a
fermentation metabolism over time so
yeah there's a lot of things that can
that can damage mitochondria over or in
a protracted way
yeah
yeah you know
oh
yeah yeah
yeah it comes through
what what remnants of an electron
transport chain might be there
so so the ross are coming predominantly
but they also come from other parts of
there's other organelles um some might
[Music]
maybe oh i can't remember it right now
it slipped my mind but there's there's
other
uh
places where ross can come but the
majority come from the mitochondria
uh and especially under uh under these
different kinds of um uh hyperoxia uh
hypoxia these kinds of things they
produce these ras
which then further damage mitochondria
and then at the same time can cause
mutations in the dna
yeah well ross are our reactive species
so they'll actually cause uh nucleotide
damage
uh they can actually cause the damage to
the lipid lipid membranes are very
important especially in the mitochondria
where you have a lot of polyunsaturated
fatty acids in the inner membrane
and the cardiolipin is the major lipid
of the inner membrane of the
mitochondria and we published major
papers showing how the cardiolipin is
all is all screwed up in these inner
membranes which regulate the function of
the electron transport chain
so so uh multiple
multiple systems within the organelle
itself
uh can lead to the production of ross
we're further damaging the system
leading to a compensatory fermentation
uh driven by oncogenes they are
transcription factors that upregulate
fermentation metabolism so they are
facilitators
of the transition from normalcy to
malignancy
all right professor stephen i want to be
respectful of your time do you do you
have time for let's say three more
questions i do i do
um heidi wants to know how compatible is
the research results with rats versus
humans
um my mice predominantly i i i don't
work with rats
i i work with mice
how compatible is the mouse to the human
extremely important question
in fact this is what we then the nice
thing about the mouse is that you can
get your results much faster than you
can in the human
the human responds better than the mouse
to the treatments this is what we always
find remarkable as well and the
difference why that's important is
because the basal metabolic rate of the
mouse
is seven times faster than that of the
human
other in other words the human is seven
times slower than that of the mouse
so when we study human cells and culture
we have to expand how long we need to
watch these cells because their
metabolism is a lot slower than that of
the mouse we can see stuff in the mouse
real quick but we have to wait a lot
longer in the human the mouse cannot
transition to ketosis as well as the
human cat humans are much much better at
transitioning to ketosis than the
mouse's so so the therapeutic benefits
of our studies in mice we always have to
keep that in mind the differences in
basal metabolic rate so when we when we
start to
uh use dosage timing and scheduling
strategies in the clinic
we have to always be cognizant of the
fact of the differences that we see how
we translate doses timing and scheduling
from our studies in the mouse have to be
modified in certain ways due to the
differences in basal metabolic rate and
that's also overlooked in many of the
experiments on on xenograph models and
patient-derived xenographs and all these
kinds of model systems where you put
cells from one organism into the body of
another organism that's 50 million years
of separation and evolution and you
don't necessarily see the same kinds of
responses
uh that you would expect in the in the
organ in the natural state of these
cells so this is extremely important
point that a lot of people don't
consider uh either in practice or or or
in design of experiments
that's a great answer
um i had a question when you were
talking to max answering his questions
so
let's say you have an hpv driven you
know cervical cancer and
you mentioned that the virus is causing
damage to the mitochondria
and i was wondering if there's anybody
that has looked at the same cancer let's
say driven by hpv for the purposes of
this cause and if they've looked at em
and looked at the structure of the
mitochondria is it the same every single
time because the source was the virus is
it the same damage yeah no that's a
great i i don't think anybody has done
that
um because you know when you get a
cancer a lot of a lot of the people
doing the em work the pathology
uh never never addressed
uh you know how did this person get
their tumor
how how are we seeing the the pathology
in this person versus the pathology and
another person that may have had a
different origin uh all we're looking at
is the end result of the insult which is
this dysregulated cell growth in a
population of cells in a particular
organ you know i i think that kind of a
question becomes relevant
uh now that you understand what the
origin of the disease uh is
so uh i i think that would be a really a
really
interesting uh strategy to look at now
that you become become aware of where
okay because they would tell this person
is ovarian cancer
or this person has breast cancer and
they well you know some of them are one
kind of and you know they switch right
somebody can have it
her two negative breasts
that develops into a triple negative you
know uh what's going on with all that
and and um so those kinds of questions i
think can be
maybe addressed now that we have a
better understanding of the origin
right yeah fascinating
and then the last question that i had
again i was thinking about when you were
talking to max
again if things are derived due to
mitochondrial damage yet
we do
see
certain genetic mutations that are
common themes amongst
many cancer lines so
what is it
that is
you know caught what what's the
signaling thing that from the damage of
the mitochondria that leads to let's say
something that's
common like um a k-ras mutation you know
why why is it selectively causing that
particular damage within the um dna
yeah yeah um well you know it might have
to do with the structure of the gene
itself like a lot of cancers have have
mutations in p53 right and i i question
this because i said you know but they
don't all as a matter of fact we know
from doing uh genomic analysis of
individual cells and tumors
that there's no two cells
no two no no no single cell has the same
genetic abnormalities as any other cell
in the tumor so there's a there's a lot
of heterogeneity
but yet every one of those cells is
fermenting regardless of what the types
of mutations that happen to be in that
particular cell so let's just consider
the p53 gene because that seems to be uh
a commonly uh a common more common than
say some some of the other genes sure
okay
um and and you know when i was reading
at this the beginning it was supposed to
be the guardian of the genome they would
call p53 it codes for cytochrome c
one of the cytochromes in the electron
transport chain which then can can link
it to
um to that and then there's some people
who have p53 germline mutations that
don't develop cancer uh they're not
they're not always
you only get the cancer when you when
you actually damage the mitochondria but
why the p53 or some of the other genes
that you see more commonly associated
with mutations um it may have to be the
vulnerability of the structure of that
gene to reactive damage reactive oxygen
damage
so um and then when i and and then you
know when they said p53 was the guardian
of the genome well you know cells that
are important a gene that would be
really really important in evolution
uh to keep ourselves
functional
should have very rare mutation not
common mutation
like for example histone prot histones
uh very rarely have um uh they don't
tolerate genetic variation at all
they're very highly conserved even with
yeast and humans i mean so whatever they
do it's so essential for the function
that you cannot tolerate a variability
heterogeneity in the structure of that
particular protein same with some of the
proteins
of the electron transport chain
they're highly conserved across species
because they they can't tolerate
heterogeneity and still function
optimally now why the guardian of the
genome would be so prone
to genetic damage makes no sense because
if you're the guardian of the precious
genome how is it possible that this gene
can be mutated more than most of the
other genes and it might have something
to do with the structure of the gene
being vulnerable to reactive oxygen
species and there was a paper published
in pnas that actually looked into this
the p53 is extremely vulnerable to ross
damage
so um uh what's his name published a
couple of years ago
i haven't cited in one of my show
but he looked into something like that
and um so you you can you can you can uh
think about those guys who love to study
the intimate structure of these genes
um
for me i don't worry about that because
the dam cell is fermenting so if i pull
a plug i don't have to worry about
whatever kind of mutation is largely
irrelevant so um you know you they can't
live without those fuels so you can kill
them so why worry about what mutation
they have right but but you're right
that's a good question and i think it
has to do with the vulnerability of
that's one explanation it could be other
sure
actually just when you said that i had
one last question sorry thank you so
much for your time but
is there any
potential that let's say the press pulse
it gets widely adopted is there
any chance of
resistance you know a tumor cell growing
resistant to a press pulse protocol
um
you know unless they everything comes
down to atp so
if you can make atp you can survive
and the question is how are you going to
make it so if the mitochondria become
normal
then the cancer will you it won't be a
tumor right right in fact mitochondrial
medicine is being considered as a
possible therapy now replace bad
mitochondria with good mitochondria
interesting so so uh and that's
basically the essence of the nuclear
transfer mitochondrial transfer
experiment right right so if you can
replace bad mitochondria in your tumor
you're not you're not going to have a
tumor so the tumor will be managed but
is there is there a way
um that a cancer cell could eventually
become resistant to a press pulse
therapy
uh only
only if it can
uh be only if it can have access
to uh glutamine
uh
to generate some sort of energy because
without everybody you have to realize
every everything is downstream of atp
because without energy nothing can grow
nothing can survive everything is
downstream of energy
so glycolysis the
that is down so you got to have energy
to do something so if the cancer cell is
dependent on fermentation for energy
then
uh targeting that how can a cancer cell
uh survive without energy and and what
is unless they say well i can generate
energy from asparagine okay
how much asparagine is in the micro
environments that allow that tumor to
grow out of control
um and uh because there is a little bit
of booze from asparagine over but never
like glutamine glutamine is the big dog
all the other amino some amino acids are
actually inhibitory like methionine
so so um so you'd have to say how is
that cancer going to get any fuel that's
going to replace glutamine and glucose
for energy and then you'd have to think
about that and there may be certain
certain circumstances that could do that
but i'm not aware of them right right
fascinating this was amazing thank you
so much for your time and being so
generous and and coming and educating us
i find this extremely fascinating
you know feel free to email me
um i'm always happy to answer questions
because the more questions that i can
answer
uh effectively
the more likely uh i'm right
that's true right
right
i always tell my students in the class
prove me wrong
prove the things that i'm telling you
prove me that i'm wrong oh this paper
over here so we let's look at that paper
and go through it dissect it deeply and
we find there's flaws in there they
didn't do the controlled experiments
they overlooked something else or they
assumed something that wasn't true
that's right so that's the way that's
the way it is yeah i know in the future
we will be doing press cult metabolic
therapy and cancer will be a metabolic
recognizes a metabolic disease they just
don't know how long it's going to take
for the field to come to realize this
that's right
well i love that professor seaford thank
you so much yeah really appreciate it
very much
bye now bye
[Music]